---
title: Nutrition
date: 2021-06-16
abstract: Notes on diet and nutrition.
categories: [misc]
---

This document provides information regarding diet and nutrition. The
premise is to identify underlying principles that determine optimal
dietary requirements for weight loss and gain. For the prior goal, I
am interested in nutrition which will provide optimal recovery and
minimal muscle loss. For the later, I am interested in maximising
muscle gain whilst minimising fat gain.

Nutrition is simply thermodynamics: Energy in must equal energy out
for a system in equilibrium. If we consider that our body is the
system, then the food we consume (energy in) must equal the energy
required for our body to function (energy out). Logic thus dictates
that when we eat less food than required, we lose weight and
conversely, gain weight when we eat more.

The quantity of food/caloric intake required to maintain our
bodyweight can be estimated from a TDEE calculator (easily available
online, I have been using [this one](https://tdeecalculator.net/)).
From there, research has shown that a 10-20% increase/decrease in
caloric intake will result in optimal weight gain/loss.

Emphasis must also be put on the macro and micro nutrients.
Specifically, research shows that 120gm of protein minimum results in
optimal muscular recovery. Up to 160gm or 0.8/lb of bodyweight
(whichever is larger) has been proven to result in optimal muscle gain
when trying to gain weight. For the micro nutrients, it goes without
saying, eat vegetables as much as possible! I personally also take
vitamin D, omega-3 and multi-vitamin supplements. Vegetables also help
me feel full longer.

Some lessons I have learned from experience. Having a good diet is not
a temporary setting and is precisely the reason why diets do not work.
Having a good diet requires time, patience and a lot of
experimentation to find out what works for the individual. Having a
good diet is only the first part, having a good diet which is also
sustainable is the key challenge (remember, you need to eat until you
die). Finally, I think this requires a fair share of psychological
strengthening. I noticed that for me, it took years until I found a
good balance of food that works for me and learned to control my
hunger/cravings.

Following are some no-nonsense, community driven, public information
that I keep coming back to time-and-time again. [r/bodyweightfitness
wiki](https://www.reddit.com/r/bodyweightfitness/wiki/index) contains
links to valuable bodyweight fitness routines. The [r/fitness
wiki](https://thefitness.wiki/) has several important pages.
Specifically, the entries on [weight/fat
loss](https://thefitness.wiki/weight-loss-101/), [muscle
building](https://thefitness.wiki/muscle-building-101/) and the
[FAQ](https://thefitness.wiki/faq/) page.

